---
layout:            post
title:             "On “Learning to write again”, an essay by Adania Shibli - Translated by Wiam El-Tamami"
menutitle:         "Analysis - “Learning to write again”, an essay by Adania Shibli"
category:          essay analysis
author:            M Irani
tags:              Jekyll Content Demo
---

### Analysis and notes

“In learning to write again”, the author Adania Shibli tries to examine, while looking through the lens of human conflict and the resulting turmoil, if ( the art of?) writing holds any significance.

While reading this essay, we had to keep in mind that the version that we were going through is a translation of the original text in arabic. Hence it is important to understand that some of elements of author’s writing may have gotten lost in translation - mostly because of the semantics of arabic that could be lost in English.

The timelines of the essay hover around Ramallah in mid 2014 to late 2014, in Berlin. However, we should remember that what the author describes here is a continuation, or, we dare say, even a mere side-effect of a conflict that started centuries ago and continues till this day.

Throughout the piece, the author has intentionally used words that are related to war to express herself even when she is not directly describing the war.  These include words like emergencies, launched, booming, dead, hostage, numb, paralyzed, defeating.

The author begins the essay by describing the ringing of her phone on a July morning in 2014, which is eventually answered by her partner. While doing so, she also describes, in detail, about her aversion to the phone (para 3, *“I have stayed true to my aversion, shunning all responsibility towards the phone”*) - here she uses the “phone”  as a, sort of, symbol of authority. The idea of projecting a communication device (and everything that it comes with) like an eventual responsibility, is to convey that we are ultimately obliged to respond to these forms and modes of communication. We should also note that in 2014 a mobile phone was not as important to daily functioning of life as it is now, in 2023.

In para 5, The author explains in detail about the phone call on a morning, by the Israeli forces, informing her of an impending attack in the next 30 minutes. The idea behind such a call is that the receiver, usually a resident of the place that the Israeli forces plan to attack, “relinquishes their ability” to accuse the Israeli government of war crimes. “Relinquishing” means to give up the claim of. Of course, here there is no claim as such because the commoners at Ramallah would always come as second best against the Israeli Armed forces. Maybe “seized” could have been a more appropriate word?

The phone that she mentions is not owned by her. It was given to her by a friend and she wonders if the call was even intended for her. The author is still left fazed by the call and further, later in paragraph 8, she writes about how her partner is left wondering about the call. She does not mention a word, and is rendered speechless, as anyone would be, after this call. It does not seem like she tells anyone about what happened (and what is going to happen) but instead focuses on getting them out of the home with a sense of urgency.

It is a matter of curiosity that the author does not mention anything about how she broke this to her partner (or if she broke it at all). Later in the paragraph she mentions “leaving them” and heading for the university while taking her elder child to a summer camp. Few paragraphs below, she tells us that she had then wondered if she would ever see her partner and the three year old child again. By keeping us in the dark about the fate of her immediate family, what is the author trying to do here?

It could be a way to evoke sympathy from the reader. At this point, despite being frozen with fear initially, either the author did not then believe that the call was intended for her after all, or it could be that she tried to put up a brave face and was determined to continue her daily routine.

At this point in the essay, she reflects back on her time at Berlin, but gives us a little insight into what made her give up on her writing. (she has left Berlin and come to Palestine, working at the department of Philosophy at Birzeit university). She weaves together helplessness, hopelessness and rationality while explaining the reasons of her departure from Berlin, in a profound display of writing (“And the more suffering the world sees, the more I feel that the most one can master through writing is solitude, while mastering words themselves becomes more difficult”)

Why does she think that the most one can master through writing is solitude? One answer could be that this suffering that one sees, probably leads to isolating oneself, physically and perhaps more importantly, mentally and emotionally. And she says, mastering words themselves, under such circumstances, becomes more difficult. Why? Could it be that because of these tragic circumstances, this conflict and suffering that the author witnesses, these have been so constant and prolonged that she often must be finding herself out of words to express, and thus, the emotion of helplessness.

A commonly acknowledged perspective of writing is that it helps people clear their minds. However, here we see a different perspective from the author - For her, writing does less to change things in dire circumstances (*“sometimes my writing is shaped by what I witness of this destruction, but most of the time it does little to change things, even in my own life.”*)

In the next two paragraphs (p11 and p12), the author talks about life at the university in Palestine. She mentions the modern ideas of Freedom and the philosophical texts that she teaches to her students in the university. We encounter an irony here - while these modern texts and ideas of freedom are being taught, many of her students, at any given time, are absent from the class because they have been detailed by the Israeli armed forces, or injured during demonstrations against the Israeli occupation.

In the same paragraph we notice another personification. *“Even if we wanted, even if we decided, to ignore it, life outside the university violently invades the classroom”* This is a personification again. Life which is abstract and not human has been given the war-like, human qualities of violently invading.

---
The scene now shifts to almost six months later, with the author traveling in a train, in Berlin. The scene described is a cold and crowded carriage of a train. In front of the author (who is standing, possibly, because of the crowd) is a lady, with a pram holding a child, possibly around two years old. The lady, embarrassed for some reason, is feeding bits of white bread to the child. In a first world’s city, the author is suddenly back at Ramallah, encountering the same feelings of helplessness.

>“In Berlin, poverty and wretchedness encircle the scraps of white bread in the hands of that woman staring out into the tunnel’s darkness”

Notice how the author talks about dismay and sadness surrounding the tiny morsels of hope and positivity (denoted by the white bread) and while doing that, she weaves her sentence too in the same way - She uses “poverty”, “wretchedness”, places the “white” bread in the middle and then ends the sentence with “darkness” (she uses the dark tunnel as a metaphor). There is also personification in this line. Here the words poverty and wretchedness (that are abstract) have been given qualities of a living being, possibly a hawk that flies and encircles its prey.

Further in the same paragraph she beautifully describes the non-verbal human interaction with the lady:

>“The eyes are careful to avoid each other’s gaze, fearing an intimacy that may betray the general feeling of solitude.” 

This line is almost like a poem (or a shayari, if you will). Lyrical. We often avoid eye contact in public places and sometimes, very rarely, eyes get locked with strangers and then you wonder what they must be thinking and the mind wanders.

Towards the end of the piece, the author mentions the faint light from the streetlamp outside, which had been casting a shadow in her bedroom that scares her in the middle of the night. Here, she compares the faint light of the streetlight to the impact of writing on society. She already knows this, but possibly validates her belief, because writing is a way to counter rumours, lies and eventually, darkness. Writing enables literacy and knowledge - because when we read, we become aware, unravel the truth and it allows us to distinguish between lies and truth. The black cube here could be a symbol of ignorance.

But in reality, the black cube was a shadow cast by a pile of books. It is important to remind ourselves that because of the constant war, sadness and death around her, the author is generally fearful of everything unknown to her. Something that is as harmless and innocuous as the shadow of a pile of books becomes magnified to be an enemy, a monster of sorts in her head. So deep is the trauma that it makes her feel like she and her writing are ineffective.

The pile of books, is further compared to words, and the small-ness associated with them. So even though they are tiny, she believes, again, they do have the power to leave an impression on those who read them.

Also, regardless of the geographical location of the events described, she evokes sentiments like shock, hopelessness, sorrow and dismay. However, she chooses to end the essay with hope, even though a bleak one, as denoted by her usage of “faint light” overcoming the darkness of her room. So, in effect, the last paragraph is the only paragraph in the essay that has a hint of positivity.
